Move appendix, update change log, RFC 7661 ref normative (#100)
mwelzl/draft-ccwg-ratelimited-increase: draft-ietf-ccwg-ratelimited-increase.md

Pacing mechanisms seek to avoid the negative impacts associated with "bursts" (flights of packets transmitted back-to-back). Rate-Limited Increase introduces a limit using "maxFS", which is based on the number of bytes in flight during a previous RTT; thus, as long as the number of bytes in flight per RTT is unaffected by pacing, Rate-Limited Increase does not constrain the use of pacing mechanisms.

# Updates to RFCs 4341, 5681, 9002, 9260, and 9438 {#rfc-updates}

## RFC 4341: The Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) CCID2

### Specification

{{Section 5.1 of !RFC4341}} states:

> >There are currently no standards governing TCP's use of the congestion window during an application-limited period.  In particular, it is possible for TCP's congestion window to grow quite large during a long uncongested period when the sender is application limited, sending at a low rate.  {{?RFC2861}} essentially suggests that TCP's congestion window not be increased during application-limited periods when the congestion window is not being fully utilized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>At the time of writing, there were no standards governing TCP's use of the congestion window during an application-limited period.  In particular, it was possible for TCP's congestion window to grow quite large during a long uncongested period when the sender is application limited, sending at a low rate.  {{?RFC2861}} essentially suggests that TCP's congestion window not be increased during application-limited periods when the congestion window is not being fully utilized.
```

Reviewer: We shouldn't be talking about 2861 here, since this was obsoleted by RFC 7661.

Author: No because that's a literal quote.

### Update

A DCCP Congestion Control ID (CCID) specifying TCP-like behaviour ought to follow the method specified in this document. The current guidance relates only to {{?RFC2861}}.

> The text in {{Section 5.1 of !RFC4341}} is updated by this document to specify the management of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The text in {{Section 5.1 of !RFC4341}} is updated by adding the text in Section in ({{rules}}) of this document to specify the management of the
```

Author: ```suggestion
The text in {{Section 5.1 of !RFC4341}} is updated by this document by adding the text in ({{rules}}) of this document to specify the management of the
```

cwnd when the sender is rate-limited.

## TCP ("Reno" congestion control)

### Specification

{{?RFC7661}} suggested there was no increase limitation in the standard TCP behavior (which {{?RFC7661}} changes), on page 4:

> >Standard TCP does not impose additional restrictions on the growth of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>At the time of writing, Standard TCP did not impose additional restrictions on the growth of
```

Author: Again a literal quote.

the congestion window when a TCP sender is unable to send at the
maximum rate allowed by the cwnd. In this case, the rate-limited
sender may grow a cwnd far beyond that corresponding to the current
transmit rate, resulting in a value that does not reflect current
information about the state of the network path the flow is using.

### Implementation {#tcp-impl}

- ns-2 allows cwnd to grow when it is rate-limited by rwnd. (Rate-limited by the sending application: not tested.)
- Until release 3.42, ns-3 allowed cwnd to grow when rate-limited, either due to an application or rwnd limit.  Since release 3.42, ns-3 TCP models conform to Rate-Limited Increase, following the current Linux TCP approach in this regard (see next bullet).
- In Congestion Avoidance, Linux only allows the cwnd to grow when the sender is unconstrained.
Before kernel version 3.16, this also applied to Slow Start.
The check for "unconstrained" is performed by checking if FlightSize is greater or equal to cwnd.
Since kernel version 3.16, which was published in August 2014, in Slow Start, the increase
implements Rate-Limited Increase in the `tcp_is_cwnd_limited` function in `tcp.h`.

### Assessment

> Linux implements a limit to cwnd growth in accordance with Rate-Limited Increase;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linux currently implements a limit to cwnd growth in accordance with Rate-Limited Increase;
```

### Assessment

The quoted statement from {{!RFC9260}} prescribes the same cwnd growth limitation that is also specified for Cubic and implemented for both Reno and Cubic in Linux.
It is in accordance with Rate-Limited Increase, and more conservative.

{{Section 7.2.1 of !RFC9260}} is specifically limited to Slow Start.
Congestion Avoidance is discussed in {{Section 7.2.2 of !RFC9260}}
However, this section neither contains a similar rule nor does it refer back to the rule that limits the growth of cwnd
in Section 7.2.1. It is thus implicitly clear that the quoted rule only applies to Slow Start, whereas Rate-Limited Increase applies to both Slow Start and Congestion Avoidance.

## The QUIC Transport Protocol

### Specification

{{Section 7.8 of !RFC9002}} states:

>When bytes in flight is smaller than the congestion window and sending is not pacing limited, the congestion window is underutilized. This can happen due to insufficient application data or flow control limits. When this occurs, the congestion window SHOULD NOT be increased in either slow start or congestion avoidance.

### Assessment

> With the exception of pacing, this specification conservatively limits the growth in cwnd, similar to Cubic and SCTP. It is in accordance with Rate-Limited Increase, and more conservative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the exception of pacing, the QUIC specification conservatively limits the growth in cwnd, similar to Cubic and SCTP. It is in accordance with Rate-Limited Increase, and more conservative.
```
